[Derived from: ../../reference/greenarrays/PB005-100501-F18B.compact.html]
Actual size 241 m x 523 m

OVERVIEW

FEATURES

The F18B is an evolutionary improvement of the F18A, offering higher speed and

 Small size, low cost  Fast, low energy design consumes only
as much energy as is needed to do the programmed work. There is no cost per
Y MIP, only per unit work
 Self-contained memory and stacks  Port and pin wakeup
R  Simple, compact instruction set
 Memory size balanced for high speed  Customizable ROM
A  Executable communication ports
 Multiport operations & port execution
IN IMPROVEMENTS in F18B
 Faster instructions  Faster memory and port operations  New addressing scheme allows slot 1
instructions to reach all destinations
IM  Read of pin returns an instruction
 Additional improvements in I/O
APPLICATIONS
L  Software defined I/O controllers
 Simple MAC and PHY components
E  Node groups control complex devices such as SDRAM or implement complex algorithms such as cryptography  Networks of nodes cooperating to
R perform parallel and/or pipelined data
or signal processing
P  Networks of nodes cooperating to

shorter code. The computer is small; eight fit in roughly a square millimeter. Depending on chip configurations, this yields between 100,000 and 200,000 computers per 8 inch wafer, contributing to the low cost of our chips.
FAST, LOW-ENERGY DESIGN: Our ruthless commitment to simplicity is reinforced by design tools that force our engineers to confront and deal with the speed and energy costs of each design feature at every stage of the layout and simulation process. We continually strive to minimize internal loading and circuitry, always willing to reinvent not only inefficient conventional designs, but also any part of our own. The F18B is an unclocked, fully asynchronous computer which can execute basic instructions in 1.4 nanoseconds without instruction fetches, and sustained rates of 1.6 nanoseconds when instruction words are fetched inline from RAM, with Vdd at 1.8V. The energy required to execute a basic instruction is on the order of 7 picojoules (pJ).
SELF CONTAINED MEMORY AND STACKS: Each F18B contains 128 words of memory (up to 512 instructions) plus 20 words of stacks and registers; no memory bottlenecks. 18-bit registers are S and T, the top two elements of the data stack; R, the top element of the return stack; and A, a read/write register. Address register B has 8 bits, and the program counter P has 10. Bit P8 is not used at present.
PORT AND PIN WAKEUP: An F18B suspends execution in mid-instruction, using only leakage (100 nW) when waiting to move data to or from another computer or when waiting for a pin to change state. Suspension and resumption take no time or energy.
INSTRUCTION SET: An 18-bit word is subdivided into four slots, each of which may contain a five-bit operation code (only codes banded in green may be used in slot 3):

SLOT 0

SLOT 1

SLOT 2

SLOT 3

17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

Opcode Notes

;

return

ex

execute (swap P and R)

name ; jump to name

name call to name

unext loop in I (decr R)

next loop

(decr R)

if

jump if T=0

-if jump if T>=0

Opcode Notes

+*

multiply step

2*

left shift

2/

right shift (signed)

-

invert all bits

+

add (or add with carry)

and

or

exclusive or

drop

simulate analog function blocks for

@p

literal

(auto incr) dup

control or DSP applications

@+

fetch via A (auto incr) pop from R to T

 Simulation, singly or in networks  Interpretation of higher level languages
for applications or parts of applications

@b

fetch via B

over

@

fetch via A

a

fetch from register A

!p

store via P (auto incr) .

nop

!+

store via A (auto incr) push from T to R

where bulk is justified

!b

store via B

b!

store to register B

 May be provided in hard IP macros for

!

store via A

a!

store to register A

incorporation in customers' ASIC, SOC, or wafer scale integrated designs.  Featured in GreenArrays GA4-1.2

Add (+) becomes add with carry when bit 9 of program counter P is set. The destinations of jump, next and call in slots 0, 1, or 2 are combinations of existing P value with the bits (13, 8, or 3 ) in the remaining slots of the instruction word; all memory and

all ports are accessible with slot 0 or 1 operations.

Each node has its own: RAM and ROM
Return Stack
Data Stack

Select

ADDRESS

ADDRESS MAP: Memory and registers are addressed with eight bits in the F18B,

Local RAM (64x18) and ROM (64x18)

Start End Address Space

according to the map shown here. When auto

00 3F RAM, 64 words

incrementing reads or writes are done using P

40 7F ROM, 64 words

(instruction fetch @p !p) or A (@+ !+), incremen-

80 FF I/O ports and registers tation of an address in RAM wraps to zero after

03F; of an address in ROM wraps to 040 after 07F; and addresses in the I/O port and

register area are not incremented at all. Address decoding in the latter area has a

value for the register io (see F18B I/O documentation), for each of five

Y communication ports (one of which may refer to an I/O pin or special register), and

for all possible combinations of those five ports as well as a bit to allow reading or

writing a special I/O register without waiting for pin wakeup.

R EXTENDED PRECISION INSTRUCTION: When executing code with bit 9 of P set to 1,
the add instruction is interpreted as add with carry. In this case, and only in this case, a latched carry bit is added to the low order bit of the sum, and the carry out
A of the 18-bit ALU is latched at the end of the operation. The latch is neither used
nor changed while P9 is zero. P9 has no effect on addressing as such.

ROM CONTENTS: Each F18B can be built with unique ROM contents, and code
IN written for a particular GA part may use routines in ROM to conserve RAM space.
We are able to build customers' application code into ROM for purposes such as creation of ASICs or barriers to competition.

DATA

COMMUNICATION PORTS: Data move between nodes across these 18-bit parallel ports. Handshaking is automatic, requiring no code and little time. When one node
IM is writing a given port at the same time as the other node sharing that port is
reading it, data move between the nodes. Until that occurs, the node which reads or writes first is suspended until the other writes or reads to satisfy the operation.

L MULTIPORT OPERATIONS: Each port is addressed by a single bit. These can be
combined in an address to read or write on multiple ports in a single operation. When the desired operation is satisfied by another node sharing any of the selected ports, the operation completes. Among many other things, this facilitates efficiently
E spreading a serial data stream among multiple paths in an array of nodes
programmed for parallel, pipelined processing.

R PORT EXECUTION: A definitive feature of the GreenArrays architecture is the ability
of a computer to directly execute instructions "fed" to it via a communication port, with profound positive results on chip capability and communication efficiency. In
P the F18B, an I/O pin may be called and when it wakes up an instruction @b ; . . is

I/O logic option for edge nodes Comm Ports (2, 3, 4 or 5)
IO Control & Status Register Return Stack (8x18) R Decrementer P (10) Incrementer (6) A B (8) I Slot Mux T ALU S

returned for execution. For communication, there is no need to decode or parse a

message when the message itself may be directly executed. This saves space, time,

Data Stack (8x18)

and energy. A node may use the resources of a neighbor without requiring any

code in its memory; thus for example a neighbor may be used as a 64 word RAM resource. Interactive debugging may be done without using devoting any space in

Each F18B COMPUTER

RAM or ROM to support that capability.

For more information, visit www.GreenArrayChips.com
© 2010 GreenArrays, Incorporated. Doc PB005-100501. Specifications are subject to change without notice. GreenArrays, GreenArray Chips, arrayForth, and the GreenArrays logo are trademarks of GreenArrays, Inc. All other trademarks or registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners.

GreenArrays, Inc. 774 Mays Blvd #10 PMB 320 Incline Village, NV 89451
(775) 298-4748 voice (775) 548-8547 fax sales@GreenArrayChips.com

Decode

